# cs1710-kmeans
Final project for CS1710: Model Checking for the k-means clustering algorithm

## Guidelines

You should write a one page README describing how you structured your model and what your model proved. You can assume that anyone reading it will be familiar with your project proposal. Here are some examples of points you might cover:

- What tradeoffs did you make in choosing your representation? What else did you try that didn’t work as well?
- What assumptions did you make about scope? What are the limits of your model?
- Did your goals change at all from your proposal? Did you realize anything you planned was unrealistic, or that anything you thought was unrealistic was doable?
- How should we understand an instance of your model and what your custom visualization shows?

## Model Overview

This project models the functioning of the k-means clustering algorithm using `z3`. Our work also includes the design of a custom visualization script that can be used to generate graphical plots that make it easy to interpret instances generated by the model. Not only does our code accurately model the functioning of the k-means clustering algorithm, but it also allows us to easily run property verifications to confirm the existence of situations in which the algorithm produces undesirable results.

The command line interface for our model is defined as follows:
```
usage: SMT solver: Property Verifications of the k-Means Clustering Algorithm
       [-h] [-i NUM_ITERS] [-p NUM_POINTS] [-c NUM_CENTERS] [-g GRID_LIMIT]
       [--random_centers] [-prop PROPERTY]

optional arguments:
  -h, --help            show this help message and exit
  -i NUM_ITERS, --num_iters NUM_ITERS
                        Number of iterations for which to run the algorithm
  -p NUM_POINTS, --num_points NUM_POINTS
                        Number of datapoints to generate
  -c NUM_CENTERS, --num_centers NUM_CENTERS
                        Number of clusters (and therefore, the number of cluster
                        centers)
  -g GRID_LIMIT, --grid_limit GRID_LIMIT
                        board dimension (each axis goes from -grid_limit to
                        grid_limit)
  --random_centers      flag indicating whether or not to random initialize centers
  -prop PROPERTY, --property PROPERTY
                        which property to verify (if any); must be one of
                        {'EMPTY_CENTER_EACH_ITERATION',
                        'OVERLAP_CENTER_EACH_ITERATION', 'OVERLAP_CENTER',
                        'EMPTY_CENTER'}
```


## Tradeoffs and Model Limitations

Our model is a faithful representation of the k-means clustering algorithm, meaning we did not make any particular abstraction choices when choosing how to model it as we were able to fully implement it. Because of the nature of `z3`, our model sacrificed efficiency and practicality (i.e. it is not compatible with extremely large datasets that one would want to use/train k-means clustering on) for the sake of having the ability to do property verification. Additionally, we also traded off completeness for soundness due to further limitations of `z3`. The model is unable to truly search the entire space of instances (meaning we cannot verify completeness) due to issues caused by attempting to perform the algorithm with exclusively `z3` variables; however, this was a necessary choice in order for our model to be a sound implementation of k-means, as we were able to resolve it by manually saving the initial `z3` variable assigments and performing the calculations based on those for the rest of the algorithm (this was necessary due to the need to compare `z3`'s `ArithRef` values with pythonic `int`s). Therefore, if our model generates an instance, that instance will be correct, however, if it says that some set of constraints is unsatisfiable, that isn't necessarily true because the space of instances has not been exhaustively searched. 

For the sake of documentation, it is also worth noting that we attempted to implement this algorithm in Forge; however, we quickly realized that the algorithm's reliance on calculations and arithmetic in general meant we would be far more successful (and able to produce larger, more meaningful instances in reasonable amounts of time) if we pivoted to `z3`. We have saved our (very limited) Forge work, and it can be found in `old_work/kmeans.frg`. 

## Custom Visualization

Once an instance is produced by the model, we have code that parses all the variables into usable datasturctures, which are fed to our custom visualization script (in `visualizer.py`). This code generates a sequence of graphical plots (one for each iteration of the algorithm) showing the positions of the centers and datapoints. Centers are labeled on the graph as `c_{center_num}` and are represented with a light-grey color. Datapoints are labeled with just a single number, which corresponds to the number of the center (cluster) that they are assigned to. Furthermore, each datapoint that is assigned to the same cluster is given the same color (but points assigned to different centers have different colors), which makes it easy to interpret how points are assigned to different clusters (centers) across iterations.

## Goals

We were able to accomplish all of our Foundation and Target goals set out at the beginning of the project, as we were able to produce a working model of the algorithm that is verifiably correct in its execution, and we built a visualizer that aligns with what our ideal visualization had been. We achieved our target goal of being able to vary over choices of both _n_ (number of data points) and _k_ (number of centers) using a random assignment of centers.

Our reach goals involved trying different kinds of center assignments and to predict how these assignment heuristics impact the algorithm's output. While we didn't quite get to this, we did build an interface through which initial center values can be manually provided. This is currently being used to randomly assign initial center values (since this is how the traditional algorithm operates), however, it can be repurposed to allow any kind of manual center assignment with some trivial changes.

## Video Demo

[Link to Google Drive](https://drive.google.com/file/d/19noJMzvvV7Z-h0A6pw8qlXdTID9qQ1hl/view?usp=sharing)

<!-- # Notes (remove later)

**Note:** When we have our final demo with Tim, he mentioned that we should make sure to remind him of our desire to potentially make animations, regardless of whether or not we actually land up needing them... he said he wants to be reminded of that as a potential extension of Sterling visualizationns (through a `d3` library or something like that).

## Meeting 2 Notes:
- We are having issues with Property Verification because our algorithm uses 'manually calculated' centers (which Tim said we would have to do), meaning they are no longer Z3 variables so we cannot add constraints to the system in order to 'search the space'... we have one idea for a property relating to points which we believe we could verify but it's not that good
- Soundness and Completeness: need a little bit more direction in terms of soundness, not quite sure how to do completeness without just copying the code we're already using (for example, when ensuring points are with the correct centers, we need to somehow know information about the correct center which we would do by comparing distances but that's exactly what we do within the model)

## Meeting 3 Notes:
- We were running into an issue with Z3 where if our constraints were satisfied at Iteration 0, the solver would be satisfied and continue attempting to generate that instance. If it ran into UNSAT at a later iteration, it would stop and not actually search the space.
- We mitigated this by forcing Z3 to search the space using looping and forced constraints to generate different instances. While this doesn't necessarily prove UNSAT because we are not able to search the entire space (the number of loops would have to be way too large as we'd need to ensure it checks every single instance) since it retries with a different set of constraints when we hit "depth 1"
- (also exists seems buggy? the constraints don't actually work when we have an exists in there)

**Properties we can verify**:
- Center has no points assigned (empty cluster)
- Overlapping centers at the end (lose a cluster) -->
